## FOMC Jan 2023 Forecast

Zexing Yang(George)
# Summary
The Federal Reserve has two responsibilities: the first one is stabilizing prices across the economy, sometimes known as controlling inflation. Additionally, the Fed aims to support a healthy economy for U.S. households, communities, and businesses(The Fed explained), fostering sustainable employment. In response to sustained high inflation, The Fed would work to steer the U.S. economy toward a gentle landing by lowering inflation down to its long-term aim of 2% while preventing a recession(“Inflation Nowcasting”). Hence, I propose Fed opts for a 25 bps hike and bring the Federal funds target rate to 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent a week from now in its first 2023 FOMC Meeting. Historically, the feds fund soared to 20% to battle double-digit inflation in the 1980s and was as low as 0 in 2008 during the great recession. The situation now in 2023 differs from those in the 1980s and 2008; however, it is predictable that Fed aims to keep raising interest rates for two main reasons. Most obviously, the upward pressure of inflation remains. The inflation indicates a downward trajectory from the peak of 9% but remains elevated, which might inevitably reduce the purchasing power of some consumers and erode long-term economic success. The situation in the 1980s was much worse than now, and Fed has already raised the target rate consecutively, but to keep the momentum taking effect, the Fed committee shall keep upscaling the rate at a modest pace. Secondly, the real GDP increased by 3.5% while the unemployment rate remain lower than the natural unemployment rate, so the economy of the U.S. is resilient and much more robust than the economy back in 2008 when the price index for gross domestic purchases increased by 1.8 percent during 2008 and real GDP decreases. In 2008, Fed’s pressing concern was fixing skyrocketing unemployment and raising market confidence in economic growth. Currently, the Fed would not concern about the downcasting impact of rising interest on employment as the unemployment rate by now-casting is lower than the expected natural rate:4.4. Thus, a modest increase of 25 base points to 4.75 % is proposed to combat inflation while stabilizing the economy as this nudge would not deter market confidence and decrease employment dramatically.

 
The Fed explained. Federal Reserve Board - The Fed Explained. (n.d.). Retrieved January 25, 2023, from https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/the-fed-explained.htm#:~:text=The%20Federal%20Reserve%20monitors%20financial,households%2C%20communities%2C%20and%20businesses. 
“Inflation Nowcasting.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, https://www.clevelandfed.org/indicators-and-data/inflation-nowcasting. 






Here is my predicted Jan 2023 FOMC statement and it might be pretty similar to that of Dec 2022. 

Recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. The war and related events are contributing to upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. The Committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4-1/4 to 4-1/2[4-1/2 to 4-3/4] percent. The Committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. In determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. In addition, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May. The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. (more) -2- In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments






